---
layout: post
title: AoE log entry 2
---

So, on Linux, there's only one x64 calling convention: System V AMD64 ABI. RDI is used to pass the first parameter. Bam! Case closed. No internet right now, so I'll get the rest of the convention later.

A friendly fellow stacksmasher recommended peda because "Vanilla GDB is terrible to use for reverse engineering and exploit development. Typing x/g30x $esp is not fun, and does not confer much information. The year is 2017 and GDB still lacks a hexdump command. GDB's syntax is arcane and difficult to approach. Windbg users are completely lost when they occasionally need to bump into GDB." Too bad so sad no internet, we gotta keep truckin' with gdb for now.

Carrying on from before, we just found the place in memory containing "Hello, world!" to be printed. rdi points to it. Let's examine the memory again.
```
(gdb) x/20ub $rdi
0x5555555546f4:	72	101	108	108	111	44	32	119
0x5555555546fc:	111	114	108	100	33	0	0	0
0x555555554704:	1	
```
Note the numbers are all pretty close. That's 'cuz they're ASCII codes, surprise. Today I learned that `man ascii` shows the ASCII table. Convenient! Erickson says you get used to recognizing these numbers when inspecting memory. Time to memorize the hex values... A good start is defining the range. 0x20 (space, decimal 32, see above) through 0x2f punctuation and symbols, 0x30-0x39 numbers, 0x3a-0x40 more symbols, 0x41-0x5a uppercase letters, 0x5b-0x60 more symbols, 0x61-0x7a lowercase letters, 0x7b-0x7e more symbols. Sweet. So you could convert between number characters and actual integers by subtracting 48 (0x30) from the character value. Or check if something is alphabetic/alphanumeric/whatever you fancy by checking whether it falls into the appropriate ranges. Or convert between cases by adding/subtracting the difference between the two ranges, 32 (0x20).

You can also interpret memory as characters in gdb:
```
(gdb) x/20cb $rdi
0x5555555546f4:	72 'H'	101 'e'	108 'l'	108 'l'	111 'o'	44 ','	32 ' '	119 'w'
0x5555555546fc:	111 'o'	114 'r'	108 'l'	100 'd'	33 '!'	0 '\000'	0 '\000'0 '\000'
0x555555554704:	1 '\001'	27 '\033'	3 '\003'	59 ';'
```

Moving on... Erickson steps through and explains much of the assembly... already know that stuff, didn't get a hard-on for low-level yesterday... x86 mnemonics and details might be different from ARM, but it's conceptually the same. Bonus: turns out lea does stand for "load effective address". I'm gonna skim the rest of the programming section, because I know C too. And I wanna get to the fun stuff!!

Hmm. The book uses atoi(). I thought atoi() was discouraged because it's broken, doesn't report errors, etc., and strtol() should be used instead.

**** TODO Poke around with the stack later. **** Note the layout of a stack frame: function parameters in reverse order, then return address, saved frame pointer (value of EBP when function was called), local variables in order of declaration. The caller pushes the parameters and return address; the callee's function prologue does the rest. Definitely gotta learn this inside and out. But I wanna get to the exploitation section!!

Ohoho. Or maybe I can do my own exploitation. There's an example program, simplenote.c, that mallocs a 100 byte buffer to store user input, but doesn't check the size of the input. (Why is it using malloc for a known size buffer?? Educational purposes?)
```
void usage(char *prog_name, char *filename) {
	printf("Usage: %s <data to add to %s>\n", prog_name, filename);
	exit(0);
}

void fatal(char *); // A function for fatal errors
void *ec_malloc(unsigned int); // An error-checked malloc() wrapper

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int fd; // file descriptor
	char *buffer, *datafile;
	buffer = (char *) ec_malloc(100);
```

So, let's get started!
```
gcc -g simplenote.c 
simplenote.c: In function ‘main’:
simplenote.c:39:7: warning: implicit declaration of function ‘write’; did you mean ‘fwrite’? [-Wimplicit-function-declaration]
    if(write(fd, buffer, strlen(buffer)) == -1)
       ^~~~~
       fwrite
simplenote.c:42:7: warning: implicit declaration of function ‘close’; did you mean ‘pclose’? [-Wimplicit-function-declaration]
    if(close(fd) == -1)
       ^~~~~
       pclose
```
Whoops. Missing header? A quick look at `man 2 write` and `man 2 close` says yes. We need `unistd.h`. Interesting. The book's exercises were run in some Ubuntu environment (though I couldn't get the included live CD to boot)---I wonder what's different from Kali. simplenote.c includes stdio, stdlib, string, fcntl, sys/stat. Adding unistd deals with the warnings.

So, I'm gonna set a breakpoint where it copies argv[1] into the buffer, then put assorted crap of various lengths in the buffer and examine memory.
```
(gdb) break 27
(gdb) run AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
(gdb) print argv[1]
$1 = 0x7fffffffe3f6 'A' <repeats 200 times>...
```
Nice! I got enough A's. Let's see what the stack looks like before `strcpy(buffer, argv[1]` executes.
```
(gdb) i r rsp rbp rip
rsp            0x7fffffffdfe0	0x7fffffffdfe0
rbp            0x7fffffffe010	0x7fffffffe010
rip            0x5555555549f2	0x5555555549f2 <main+98>
gdb) x/16xw $rsp
0x7fffffffdfe0:	0xffffe0f8	0x00007fff	0x00000000	0x00000002
0x7fffffffdff0:	0x55554bd0	0x00005555	0x55554850	0x00005555
0x7fffffffe000:	0x55757080	0x00005555	0x55757010	0x00005555
0x7fffffffe010:	0x55554bd0	0x00005555	0xf7a5a2b1	0x00007fff
```
Lots of these look like addresses from/near the text section of memory---note the similarity to rip.
```
help
help running
```
Okay, gotta use 'step' to get to the next source line. Also, what a discovery, there's a help section for examining the stack.
```help stack
help backtrace
```
So it prints a backtrace of stack frames, and if you add 'full', it prints local variables too. Cool. And it's 'bt' for short.
```
(gdb) bt full
#0  main (argc=2, argv=0x7fffffffe0f8) at simplenote.c:27
        fd = 21845
        buffer = 0x555555757010 ""
        datafile = 0x555555757080 "/tmp/notes"
(gdb) x/8xg $rsp
0x7fffffffdfe0:	0x00007fffffffe0f8	0x0000000200000000
0x7fffffffdff0:	0x0000555555554bd0	0x0000555555554850
0x7fffffffe000:	0x0000555555757080	0x0000555555757010
0x7fffffffe010:	0x0000555555554bd0	0x00007ffff7a5a2b1
```
Wouldja look at that. The addresses of buffer and datafile are in the third line.
```
(gdb) x fd
0x5555:	Cannot access memory at address 0x5555
```
Since local variables go on the stack in the order declared, fd must be below buffer, at a higher address. I would expect it to be right after buffer (0x555555757010), but there's 0x4bd0 before any 0x5555.
```
(gdb) x/24xb 0x7fffffffe000
0x7fffffffe000:	0x80	0x70	0x75	0x55	0x55	0x55	0x00	0x00
0x7fffffffe008:	0x10	0x70	0x75	0x55	0x55	0x55	0x00	0x00
0x7fffffffe010:	0xd0	0x4b	0x55	0x55	0x55	0x55	0x00	0x00
```
On that note, 0x555555554bd0 shows up another time on the stack too. What is it?
I checked the disas of all the functions---the highest address of an instruction is 0x0000555555554bc1. So close, yet so far.
Oh, note also! 0x7fffffffe010 is the address in RBP, the stack frame base pointer. Note also also, looking back to the backtrace, that we can see the parameters to main on the stack. Gonna paste it again for easy reading:
```
(gdb) bt full
#0  main (argc=2, argv=0x7fffffffe0f8) at simplenote.c:27
        fd = 21845
        buffer = 0x555555757010 ""
        datafile = 0x555555757080 "/tmp/notes"
(gdb) x/8xg $rsp
0x7fffffffdfe0:	0x00007fffffffe0f8	0x0000000200000000
```
From the book, I would have expected these to be somewhere below the local variables. Is it a difference between my architecture and Erickson's? Or special behavior for main?

Somewhere on there should be the return address and saved frame pointer as well. Again, not entirely sure what those values are for main. Will investigate more thoroughly later. Now I'mma step and see what happens when 200 A's are unloaded into an unsuspecting buffer.

...Accidentally stepped into strcpy, learned that there are instructions like "pmovmskb" or "movdqu" or "movsxd". Now that's a scrabble hand. Use "finish" to run until strcpy returns. Now let's see what we got.
```
(gdb) x/8xg $rsp
0x7fffffffdfe0:	0x00007fffffffe0f8	0x0000000200000000
0x7fffffffdff0:	0x0000555555554bd0	0x0000555555554850
0x7fffffffe000:	0x0000555555757080	0x0000555555757010
0x7fffffffe010:	0x0000555555554bd0	0x00007ffff7a5a2b1
```
............RIGHT. Of course nothing will change here. Buffer only stores a pointer to memory on the heap. RADICAL RALPH, YOU ARE SILLY. We need to look at the heap, not the stack. Well, at least we learnt lots about the stack and got some practice with gdb. So now that I've realized I'm on the heap, what can I do? The heap grows down toward higher memory addresses, and datafile is at a higher address than buffer, so I can overwrite the filename.
```
(gdb) print buffer
$5 = 0x555555757010 'A' <repeats 200 times>...
(gdb) print datafile
$6 = 0x555555757080 'A' <repeats 183 times>
```
Confirmed. Radical Ralph's first heap-based buffer overflow!! Hold up, though. Why does datafile point to a string of 183 A's? Shouldn't the buffer have room for at least 100?

Anyway, my trusty taptap is low power... In addition to no internet, I have no power. Fuck yeah, hacking in the woods! Radical Ralph out!
